Pedram, welcome to Talk Python.
It's amazing to have you here.
Michael, great to be here.
Yeah. Get to talk about data,
data pipelines, automation, and boy,
let me tell you have I been in the DevOps side of things this week.
I'm going to have a special appreciation of it,
I can tell already.
So before we get to that, though, before we talk about Dagster and data pipelines and orchestration
more broadly, let's just get a little bit of background on you. Introduce yourself for people.
How'd you get into Python and data orchestration and all those things?
Of course. Yeah. So my name is Pedram Navid. I'm the head of data engineering and DevRel
at Dexter. That's a mouthful. And I've been a longtime Python user since 2.7. And I got started
with Python like I do with many things just out of sheer laziness. I was working at a bank and
there was this rote task, something involving going into servers, opening up a text file and
seeing if a patch was applied to a server. A nightmare scenario when there's 100 servers to
check and 15 different patches to confirm. Yeah. So this kind of predates like the cloud and all
that automation stuff. Right. So this is definitely before cloud. this was like right between
Python two and Python three. And we were trying to figure out how to use print statements correctly.
That's when I learned Python. I was like, there's gotta be a better way. And honestly,
I've not looked back. I think if you look at my entire career trajectory, you'll see it's just
punctuated by finding ways to be more lazy in many ways.
Yeah. Who was it?
I think it was Matthew Rocklin that had the phrase something like productive
laziness or something like that.
I'm going to find a way to leverage my laziness to force me to build automation
so I never ever have to do this sort of thing again.
It's very motivating to not have to do something.
And I'll do anything to not do something.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's incredible.
And like that DevOps stuff I was talking about,
and just, you know, one command
and there's maybe eight or nine new apps
with all their tiers redeployed, updated, resynced.
And it took me a lot of work to get there,
but now I never have to think about it again,
at least not for a few years.
And it's amazing.
I can just be productive.
It's like right in line, in line with that.
So what are some of the Python projects
you've been, you've worked on, talked about different ways to apply this over the years.
Oh, yeah. So it started with internal, just like Python projects, trying to automate, like I said,
some rote tasks that I had. And that accidentally becomes, you know, a bigger project. People see it
and they're like, oh, I want that too. And so, well, now I have to build like a GUI interface
because most people don't speak Python. And so that got me into PyGUI, I think it was called,
way back when. That was a fun journey. And then from there, it's really taken off. A lot of it
has been mostly personal projects, trying to understand open source was a really big learning
path for me as well. Really being absorbed by things like SQLAlchemy and requests back when
they were coming out. Eventually, it led to more of a data engineering type of role, where I got
involved with tools like Airflow and try to automate data pipelines instead of patches on a
server. That one day led to, I guess, making a long story short, a role at Dagster, where now I
contribute a little bit to Dagster. I work on Dagster, the core project itself, but I also use
Dagster internally to build our own data pipelines. I'm sure it's interesting to see how you all both
build Dagster and then consume Dagster.
Yeah, it's been, it's been wonderful.
I think there's a lot of great things about it.
One is like getting access to Dagster before it's, you know, fully released.
Right.
So internally we dog food, new features, new concepts, and we work with the product
team, the engineering team to say, Hey, this makes sense.
This doesn't, this works really well.
That doesn't.
And that feedback loop is so, so fast and so iterative that like for me personally,
being able to see that come to fruition is really, really compelling.
But at the same time, it's like I get to work at a place that's building a tool for me.
You don't often get that luxury.
I've worked in ads.
I've worked in insurance.
It's like banking.
It's like these are nice things, but it's not built for me.
And so for me, that's probably been the biggest benefit, I would say.
Right.
If you work in some marketing thing, you're like, you know, I retargeted myself so well
today.
You wouldn't believe it.
I really enjoyed it.
I mean, I've seen ads that I've created before, so it's a little fun, but it's not the same.
Yeah.
I've heard of people who are really, really good at ad targeting and finding groups where they've like pranked their wife or something or just had an ad that would only show up for their wife by running.
It was like so specific and, you know, freak them out a little bit.
Yeah, that's pretty clever.
Yeah, maybe it wasn't appreciated, but it is clever.
who knows all right well oh you before we jump in um you said that of course you built guis
with pygui and those sorts of things because people don't speak python back then two seven
days and whatever is that different now not that people speak python but is it different in the
sense that like hey i could give them a Jupyter notebook or i could give them streamlet or or one
of these things right like a little more or less you build and just like plug it in i think so i
mean it's yeah like you said it's not different in the you know most people probably still to this
day don't speak python yeah and i know we had this like movement a little bit back where everyone was
going to learn like sql and everyone was going to learn to code and i was never that bullish on that
trend because like if i'm a marketing person i've got 10 000 things to do and learning to code isn't
going to be the priority ever. So I think building interfaces for people that are easy to use and
speaks well to them is always useful. That never has gone away. But I think the tooling around it
has been better, right? I don't think I'll ever want to use PyGui again. Nothing wrong with the
platform. It's just like not fun to write. Streamlit makes it so easy to do that. So it's like
something like retool and there's like a thousand other ways now that you can bring these tools in
front of your stakeholders and your users that just wasn't possible before. I think it's a pretty
exciting time. There are a lot of pretty polished tools. Yeah, it's gotten so good. Yeah. There's
some interesting ones like OpenBB. Do you know that? The financial dashboard thing. I've heard
of this. I haven't seen it. Yeah, it's basically for traders, but it's like a terminal type thing
that has a bunch of matplotlib and other interactive stuff that pops up kind of compared
to say Bloomberg dashboard type things.
But yeah, that's one sense where like maybe like traders go and learn Python because it's
like, all right, there's enough value here.
But in general, I don't think, yeah, I don't think people are going to stop what they're
doing and learning the code.
So these new UI things are not.
All right.
Let's dive in and talk about this general category first of data pipelines, data orchestration, all those things.
We'll talk about Dagster and some of the trends and that.
So I just grabbed some random internet search for what does a data pipeline maybe look like.
But people out there listening who don't necessarily live in that space, which I think is honestly many of us.
Maybe we should, but maybe in our minds, we don't think we live in data pipeline land.
Tell them about it.
Yeah, for sure.
It is hard to think about if you haven't done or built one before.
In many ways, a data pipeline is just a series of steps that you apply to some data set that you have
in order to transform it to something a little bit more valuable at the very end.
That's a simplified version.
The devil's in the details.
But really, at the end of the day, you're in a business.
The production of data happens by the very nature of operating that business.
It tends to be the core thing that all businesses have in common.
And then the other output is you have people within that business who are trying to understand how the business is operating.
And this used to be easy when all we had was a single spreadsheet that we could look at once a month.
I think businesses have gone a little bit more complex in these days.
And the expectations, like they expect to be able to see almost real time, not I'll see it at the end of the month sort of data.
Yeah.
I think people have gotten used to getting data too, which is both good and bad.
Good in the sense that now people are making better decisions, bad, and then there's more work for us to do.
And we can't just sit in our feet for half a day, half a month and waiting for the next request to come in.
There's just an endless stream that seems to never end.
So that's what really the pipeline is all about.
like taking these data and making it consumable in a way that users tools will understand that helps
people make decisions at the very end of the day that's sort of the nuts and bolts of it
in your mind does data acquisition live in this land so for example maybe we have a scheduled job
that goes and does web scraping calls an api once an hour and that might kick off a whole pipeline
of processing or we watch a folder for people to upload over FTP, like a CSV file or something
horrible like that.
You don't even, it's unspeakable, but something like that where you say, oh, a new CSV has
arrived for me to get, right?
Yeah, I think that's the beginning of all data pipeline journeys in my mind, very much,
Right? Like an FTP, as much as we hate it, it's not terrible.
I mean, there are worse ways to transfer files,
but it's, I think, still very much in use today.
And every data pipeline journey at some point has to begin
with that consumption of data from somewhere.
Yeah. Hopefully it's SFTP, not just straight FTP.
Like the encrypted, don't just send your password in the plain text.
Oh, well.
I've seen that go wrong.
That's a story for another day, honestly.
All right.
Well, let's talk about the project that you work on.
We've been talking about it in general, but let's talk about Dagster.
Where does it fit in this world?
Yes.
Dagster, to me, is a way to build a data platform.
It's also a different way of thinking about how you build data pipelines.
Maybe it's good to compare it with kind of what the world was like, I think, before Dijkstra and how it came about to be.
So if you think of Airflow, I think it's probably the most canonical orchestrator out there.
But there are other ways which people used to orchestrate these data pipelines.
They were often task-based, right?
Like I would download file.
I would unzip file.
I would upload file.
So these are sort of the words we use to describe the various steps within a pipeline.
Some of those little steps might be Python functions that you write.
Maybe there's some prebuilt other ones.
Yeah, they might be Python.
Could be a bash script.
Could be logging into a server and downloading a file.
Could be hitting requests to download something from the internet, unzipping it.
Just a various hodgepodge of commands that would run.
That's typically how we thought about it.
For more complex scenarios where your data is bigger, maybe it's running against a Hadoop cluster or a Spark cluster.
The compute's been offloaded somewhere else.
But the sort of conceptual way you tended to think about these things is in terms of tasks, right?
Process this thing, do this massive data dump, run a bunch of things, and then your job is complete.
With Airflow, or sorry, with Dagster, we kind of flip it around a little bit on our heads.
And we say, instead of thinking about tasks, what if we flipped that around and thought about the actual underlying assets that you're creating?
What if you told us not, you know, the steps that you're going to take, but the thing that you produce?
Because it turns out as people and as data people and stakeholders, really, we don't care about the task.
Like, we just assume that you're going to do it.
What we care about is, you know, that table, that model, that file, that Jupyter notebook.
And if we model our pipeline through that, then we get a whole bunch of other benefits.
And that's sort of the Dagster sort of pitch, right?
Like if you want to understand the things that are being produced by these tasks, tell us about the underlying assets.
And then when a stakeholder says and comes to you and says, you know, how old is this table?
Has it been refreshed lately?
Well, you don't have to go look at a specific task.
And remember that task ABC had model XYZ.
You just go and look up Model XYZ directly there and it's there for you.
And because you've defined things in this way, you get other nice things like a lineage graph.
You get to understand how fresh your data is.
You can do event-based orchestration and all kinds of nice things that are a lot harder to do in a task world.
Yeah, more declarative, less imperative, I suppose.
Yeah, it's been the trend, I think, in lots of tooling.
React, I think, was famous for this as well, right, in many ways.
it was a hard framework, I think, for people to sort of get their heads around initially
because we were so used to like the jQuery declared or jQuery style of doing things.
Yeah. How do I hook the event that makes the thing happen?
And React said, let's think about it a little bit differently. Let's do this event-based
registration. Really. And I think the proofs in the pudding React is everywhere now and jQuery
maybe not so much. Yeah. There's still a lot of jQuery out there, but there's not a lot of
not a lot of active jQuery but i imagine there's some there is yes yeah just because people like
you know what don't touch that that works which is probably the smartest thing people can do i think
yeah honestly even though things are new frameworks are shiny and you know if there's any ecosystem
that loves to chase the shiny new idea it's the javascript web world oh yeah there's no shortage
of new frameworks coming out every now i mean we do too but not as much as like that six months all
that's so old we can't possibly do that anymore we're rewriting it we're gonna do the big rewrite
again yep fun okay so daxter daxter is the company but also is open source what's the
story around like can i use it for free is it open source do i pay for it okay so daxter labs is the
company daxter open source is the product it's 100 free we're very committed to the open source model
I would say 95% of the things you can get out of Dagster are available through open source and we
tend to try to release everything through that model you can run very complex pipelines and you
can deploy it all on your own if you wish there is a Dagster cloud product which is really the
hosted version of Dagster if you want a hosted plane we can do that for you through Dagster cloud
but it all runs on the same code base and the modeling and the files all essentially look the
mm-hmm okay so obviously you could get like i talked about at the beginning you could go down
the devops side get your own open source daxter set up schedule it run it on servers all those
things but if we just wanted something real simple we could just go to you guys and say
hey i built this with daxter will you run it for me pretty much yeah right so there's two options
there you can do the serverless model which says you know daxter just run it uh we take
the compute take care of the execution for you and you just write the code and upload it to GitHub or
any you know repository of your choice and we'll sync to that and then run it the other option is
to do that's nice so sorry so you basically do the cicd aspect you just say you push to name your
branch if you push that branch that means we're just going to deploy a new version and whatever
happens after that it'll be in production right exactly yeah and we offer some templates that you
in GitHub for workflows in order to accommodate that.
Excellent.
Then I cut you off.
You're saying something about hybrid.
Hybrid is the other option for those of you
who want to run your own compute.
You don't want the data leaving your ecosystem.
You can say we've got this Kubernetes cluster,
this ECS cluster,
but we still want to use the Dagster Cloud product
to sort of manage the control plane.
Dagster Cloud will do that.
And then you can go off and execute things
on your own environment
if that's something you wish to do.
Oh yeah, that's pretty clever
because running stuff in containers isn't too bad,
but running container clusters,
all of a sudden you're back doing a lot of work, right?
Exactly, yeah.
Yeah.
Okay, well, let's maybe talk about Dagster for a bit
that I wanted to talk about some of the trends as well,
but let's just talk through maybe setting up a pipeline.
What does it look like?
You talked about in general, less imperative, more declarative,
but what does it look like?
Be careful about talking about code on audio,
but give us a sense of what the programming model
feels like for us.
As much as possible,
it really feels like just writing Python.
It's pretty easy.
You add a decorator on top of your existing Python function
that does something.
That's a simple decorator called asset,
and then your pipeline, that function,
becomes a data asset.
That's how it's represented in the Dagster UI.
So you could imagine you've got a pipeline that gets like maybe Slack analytics and uploads that to some dashboard, right?
Your first pipeline, your function would be called something like Slack data, and that would be your asset.
In that function is where you do all the transform, the downloading of the data, until you've really created that fundamental data asset that you care about.
And that could be stored either, you know, data warehouse, 2S3, however you sort of want to persist it, that's really up to you.
And then the resources is sort of where the power, I think, of a lot of Dynastry comes in.
So the asset is sort of like declaration of the thing I'm going to create.
The resource is how I'm going to, you know, operate on that, right?
Because sometimes you might want to have a, let's say, a DuckDB instance locally because it's easier and faster to operate.
But when you're moving to the cloud, you want to have a Databricks or a Snowflake.
You can swap out resources based on environments and your asset can reference that resource.
And as long as it has that same sort of API, you can really flexibly change between where that data is going to be persistent.
Does Dagster know how to talk to those different platforms?
Does it natively understand DuckDB and Snowflake?
Yeah, so it's interesting.
People often look to Dagster and like, oh, does it do X?
And the question is like, Dagster does anything you can do Python with.
Most things, yeah.
Which is most things.
So I think if you come from the Airflow world, you're very much used to like these Airflow providers.
And if you want to use...
That's kind of what I was thinking, yeah.
Yeah.
You want to use a Postgres, you need to find the Postgres provider.
You want to use S3, you need to find the S3 provider.
With Dagster, you kind of say you don't have to do any of that.
If you want to use Snowflake, for example, you install the Snowflake connector.
package from Snowflake and you use that as a resource directly.
And then you just run your SQL that way.
There are some places where we do have integrations that help.
If you want to get into the weeds with IO managers, where we persist the data on your
behalf.
And so for S3, for Snowflake, for example, there's other ways where we can persist that
data for you.
But if you're just trying to run a query, just trying to execute something, just trying
to save something somewhere, you don't have to use that system at all.
You can just use whatever, you know,
Python package you would use anyway to do that.
So maybe some data is expensive for us to get as a company.
Like maybe we're charged on a usage basis
or super slow or something.
I could write just Python code that goes and say,
well, look in my local database.
If it's already there, use that and it's not too stale.
Otherwise, then do actually go get it.
Put it there and then get it back.
Like that kind of stuff would be up to me to put together.
Yeah.
And that's the nice thing is you're not really limited by like anyone's data model or world
view on how data should be retrieved or saved or augmented.
You could do it a couple of ways.
You could say, whenever I'm working locally, use this, you know, persisted data store that
we're just going to use for development purposes.
A fancy database called SQLite, something like that.
Exactly.
Yes.
A wonderful database.
And actually it's yeah, it'll work really, really well.
And then you just say when I'm in a different environment, when I'm in production, swap out my SQLite resource for a name, your favorite cloud warehouse resource and go fetch that data from there.
Or I want to use mini IO locally.
I want to use S3 on prod.
It's very simple to swap these things out.
Okay.
Yeah.
So it looks like you build up these assets, as you all call them, these pieces of data, Python code that accesses them.
And then you have a nice UI that lets you go and build those out, kind of workflow style, right?
Yeah, exactly.
This is where we get into the wonderful world of DAGs, which stands for directed acyclic graph, I think.
It stands for a bunch of things that are not connected in a circle, but are connected in some way.
So there can't be any loops, right?
Because then you never know where to start or where to end.
Could be a diamond, but not a circle.
Not a circle.
As long as there's like a path through this data set
with the beginning and an end,
then we can kind of start to model this connected graph of things.
And then we know how to execute them, right?
We can say, well, this is the first thing we have to run
because that's where all dependencies start.
And then we can either branch off in parallel
or we can continue linearly until everything is complete.
And if something breaks in the middle, we can resume from that broken spot.
Okay, excellent.
And is that the recommended way?
Like if I write all this Python code that works on the pieces, then the next recommendation
would be to fire up the UI and start building it?
Or you say, ah, you should really write it in code and then you can just visualize it
or monitor it.
Everything in Dagster is written as code.
The UI reads that code and it interprets it as a DAG.
and then it displays that for you.
There are some things to do with the UI.
Like you can materialize assets.
You can make them run.
You can do backfills.
You can view metadata.
You can sort of enable and disable schedules.
But the core, we really believe this is like the core declaration of how things are done.
It's always done through code.
Okay.
Excellent.
So when you say materialize, maybe I have an asset, which is really a Python function I wrote that goes and pulls down a CSV file.
The materialize would be, I want to see kind of representative data in this, in the UI.
And so I could go, all right, I think this is right.
Let's keep passing it down.
Is that what that means?
Materialize really means just run this particular asset, make this asset new again, fresh again,
right?
As part of that materialization, we sometimes output metadata.
And you can kind of see this on the right.
If you're looking at the screen here where we talk about what the timestamp was, the URL,
there's a nice little graph of like number of rows over time all that metadata is something you can
emit and we emit some ourselves by default with the framework and then as you materialize these
assets as you run that asset over and over again over time we capture all that and then you can
really get a nice overview of you know this asset's lifetime essentially nice yeah i think the
asset the metadata is really pretty excellent right over time you can see how the data's
grown and changed and yeah the metadata is really powerful um and it's one of the nice
benefits of being in this asset world right because you don't really want to metadata on
like this task that run you want to know like uh this table that i created how many rows has it
had every single time it's run because if that number drops by like 50 that's a big problem
conversely if the runtime is slowly increasing every single day you might not notice it
but over a month or two,
it went from a 30 second pipeline to, you know, 30 minutes.
Maybe there's like a great place to start optimizing
that one specific asset.
Right.
And what's cool if it's just Python code?
Well, you know how to optimize that probably, right?
Hopefully, yeah.
Well, as much as you're going to, yeah,
you've got, you have all the power of Python
and you should be able to,
as opposed to it's deep down inside some framework
that you don't really know, right?
Yeah.
You use Python, you can benchmark it,
there's probably you probably knew you didn't read it that well when you first started and um you can
always find ways to improve it so this UI is something that you can just run locally kind of
like jupiter 100 just type dacester dev and then you get the full UI uh experience you get to see
the runs all your assets is it a web app it is yeah um it's a web app uh there's a postgres
backend and then there's a couple of services that run the web server the graphql and then the workers
nice yeah so pretty serious web app it sounds like but yeah yeah just something you run all um
probably containers or something you just fire up when you download it right
uh locally it doesn't even use containers it's just all pure python um for that but
nice once you deploy yeah i think you might want to go down the container route but it's nice not
having to have docker just to like run a simple test deployment yeah i guess not everyone's
machine has that for sure so question from the audience here um jazzy asks does it hook into aws
in particular is it compatible with existing pipelines like ingestion lambdas or transform
land res yeah you can look into aws so we have some aws integrations built in like i mentioned
before there's nothing stopping you from importing boto3 and doing anything really you want so
a very simple use case like let's say you already have an existing transformation that's being
triggered in aws through some lambda you could just model that within dexter and say you know trigger
that Lambda through Boto3.
And then the asset itself
is really that representation of that pipeline.
But you're not actually running that code
within Baxter itself.
That's still occurring on the AWS framework.
And that's a really simple way to start
adding a little bit of observability
and orchestration to existing pipelines.
Okay.
That's pretty cool because now you have this nice UI
and these metadata in this history,
but it's someone else's cloud.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And you can start to pull more information in there.
And over time, you might decide, you know, this, you know, lambda that I had, it's starting to get out of hand.
I want to kind of break it apart into multiple assets where I want to sort of optimize it a little way.
And Dagster can help you along that.
Well, yeah.
Excellent.
How do you set up like triggers or observability inside Dagster?
Like Jazzy's asking about S3, but like in general, right?
If a row is entered into a database, something is dropped in a blob storage or the date changes, I don't know.
Yeah, those are great questions.
So you have a lot of options.
In Dexter, we do model every asset with a couple little flags, I think, that are really useful to think about.
One is whether the code of that particular asset has changed.
And then the other one is whether anything upstream of that asset has changed.
And those two things really power a lot of automation functionality that we can get downstream.
So let's start with, I think, the S3 example is the easiest to understand.
You have a bucket, and there is a file that gets uploaded every day.
You don't know what time that file gets uploaded.
You don't know when it'll be uploaded, but you know at some point it will be.
In Dexter, we have a thing called the sensor, which you can just connect to an S3 location.
You can define how it looks into that file or into that folder.
And then you would just pull every 30 seconds until something happens.
When that something happens, that triggers sort of an event.
And that event can trickle at your will downstream to everything that depends on it as you sort
of connect to these things.
So it gets you awake from this, like, oh, I'm going to schedule something to run every
hour.
Maybe the data will be there, but maybe it won't.
And you can have a much more event-based workflow.
this file runs, I want everything downstream to know that this data has changed. And as sort of
data flows through these systems, everything will sort of work its way down. Yeah, I like it. The
sensor concept is really cool because I'm sure that there's a ton of cloud machines that people
provisioned just because this thing runs every 15 minutes, that runs every 30 minutes, and you add
them up and aggregate we need eight machines just to handle the automation rather than you know
because they're hoping to catch something without too much latency but maybe like that actually only
changes once a week exactly and i think that's where we have to like sometimes step away from
the way we're so used to thinking about things and i'm guilty of this when i create a data pipeline
my natural inclination is to create a schedule where it's a is this a daily one is this weekly
Is this monthly?
But what I'm finding more and more is when I'm creating my pipelines, I'm not adding a schedule.
I'm using Dagster's auto-materialized policies.
And I'm just telling it, you figure it out.
I don't have to think about schedules.
Just figure out when the things should be updated.
When it's, you know, parents have been updated, you run.
When the data has changed, you run.
And then just like figure it out and leave me alone.
Yeah.
And it's worked pretty well for me so far.
I think it's great.
I have a search, refresh the search index on the various podcast pages that runs.
And it runs every hour, but the podcast ships weekly, right?
But I don't know which hour it is.
And so it seems like that's enough latency, but it would be way better to put just a little
bit of smarts like, what was the last date that anything changed?
Was that since the last time you saw it?
Maybe we'll just leave that alone, you know?
But yeah, you're starting to inspire me to go write more code, but pretty cool.
All right.
So on the homepage at Dagster.io, you've got a nice graphic that shows you both how to write the code, like some examples of the code, as well as how that looks in the UI.
And one of them says to launch backfills.
What is this backfill thing?
Oh, this is my favorite thing.
Okay.
When you first start your data journey as a data engineer, you sort of have a pipeline and you build it and it just runs on a schedule and that's fine.
What you soon find is, you know, you might have to go back in time, right?
You might say, I've got this data set that updates monthly.
Here's a great example.
AWS cost reporting, right?
AWS will send you some data around, you know, all your instances and your S3 bucket, all that.
and it'll update that data every day or every month or whatever have you.
Due to some reason, you've got to go back in time and refresh data that AWS updated due to some discrepancy.
Backfill is sort of how you do that.
And it works hand in hand with this idea of a partition.
A partition is sort of how your data is naturally organized,
and it's like a nice way to represent that natural organization.
It has nothing to do with the fundamental way how often you want to run it.
It's more around like I've got a data set that comes in once a month.
It's represented monthly.
It might be updated daily, but it's the representation of the data is monthly.
So I will partition it by month.
It doesn't have to be dates.
It could be strings.
It could be a list.
You could have a partition for every company or every client or every domain you have.
Whatever you sort of think is a natural way to think about breaking apart that pipeline.
And once you do that partition, you can do these nice things called backfills, which says, instead of running this entire pipeline and all my data, I want you to pick that one month where data went wrong or that one month where data was missing and just run the partition on that range.
And so you limit compute, you save resources and get a little bit more efficient.
And it's just easier to like think about your pipelines because you've got this natural built in partitioning system.
Excellent.
So maybe you missed some important event.
Maybe your automation went down for a little bit, came back up.
You're like, oh no, we've, we've missed it.
Right.
But you want to start over three years.
So maybe we could just go and run the last day.
It's worth it.
Exactly.
Or another one would be your vendor says, Hey, by the way, we actually screwed up.
We uploaded this file from two months ago, but the numbers were all wrong.
Yeah.
We've uploaded a new version to that destination.
Can you update your data set?
One way is to recompute the entire universe from scratch.
But if you've partitioned things, then you can say,
no, limit that to just this one partition for that one.
And that one partition can trickle down all the way
to all your other assets that depend on that one.
Do you have to pre-decide?
Do you have to think about this partitioning beforehand
or can you do it retroactively?
You can do it retroactively.
And I have done that before as well.
It really depends on where you're at.
I think if it's your first asset ever,
probably don't bother with partitions,
but it really isn't a lot of work to get them started.
Okay.
Yeah, really neat.
I like a lot of the ideas here.
I like that it's got this visual component
that you can see what's going on, inspect it.
You also see you can debug runs.
What happens there?
Like obviously when you're pulling data
from many different sources,
maybe it's not your data you're taking in,
you know, fields could vanish.
It can be the wrong type systems can go down.
I'm sure the debugging is interesting.
So it looks a little bit kind of like a web browser
debug dev tools thing.
- So for the record, my code never fails.
I've never had a bug in my life,
but for those of you who have.
- Yeah, well mine doesn't either.
I only do it to make an example and remind me how other...
Yes.
If I do, it's intentional, of course.
You have to humble myself a little bit.
Exactly.
This view is one of my favorite.
I mean, so many favorite views.
But it's actually really fun to watch this run when you execute this pipeline.
But really, let's go back to the world before orchestrators.
We used Cron, right?
We'd have a bash script that would do something,
and we'd have a crown drop that said,
make sure that this thing runs.
And then hopefully it was successful,
but sometimes it wasn't.
And it's a sometimes it wasn't,
that's always been the problem, right?
It's like, well, what do I do now?
How do I know why it failed?
When did it fail?
You know, at what point, what steps did it fail?
That's really hard to do.
What this debugger really is,
is a structured log of every step that's been going on
through your pipeline, right?
So in this view, there's three assets
that we can kind of see here.
One is called users, one is called orders,
and one is to run dbt.
Presumably there's these two tables that are being updated
and then a dbt job, it looks like,
that's being updated at the very end.
Once you execute this pipeline,
all the logs are captured from each of those assets.
So you can manually write your own logs.
You have access to a Python logger
and you can use your info, your error,
whatever have you, and log output.
that way and it'll be captured in a structured way but it also capture uh logs from your
integrations so if you're using dbt we capture those logs as well you can see it processing every
single asset so if anything does go wrong you can filter down and understand at what step at what
point did something go wrong that's awesome and just the historical aspect because just going
through logs, especially multiple systems can be really, really tricky to, you know, figure
out what's the problem, what, what actually caused this to go wrong, but come back and
say, oh, it crashed, pull up the UI and see, all right, well, show me, show me what this
run did and show me what this job did.
And it seems like it's a lot easier to debug than, you know, standard web API or something
like that.
Exactly.
You can click onto any of these assets
and get that metadata that we had earlier as well.
If, you know, one step failed and it's kind of flaky,
you can just click on that one step and say,
just rerun this.
Everything else is fine.
We don't need to restart from scratch.
Okay.
And it'll keep the data from before
so you don't have to rerun that.
Yeah.
I mean, it depends on how you've built the pipeline.
We like to build idempotent pipelines
is how we sort of talk about it,
the data engineering landscape, right?
So you should be able to run something multiple times
and not break anything in a perfect world.
That's not always possible.
But ideally, yes.
And so we can presume that if users completed successfully,
then we don't have to run that again
because that data was persisted, you know,
a database S3 somewhere.
And if orders was the one that was broken,
we can just only run orders
and not have to worry about rewriting the whole thing from scratch.
So idempotent for people who maybe don't know,
If you run it once or you perform the operation once or you perform it 20 times, same outcome.
It should have side effects, right?
That's the idea.
Yeah.
Easier something then sometimes.
It sure is.
Sometimes it's easy.
Sometimes it's very hard.
But the more you can build pipelines that way, the easier your life becomes.
Generally, not always, but generally true for programming as well.
If you talk to functional programming people, they'll say it's an absolute.
Yes. Functional programmers love this kind of stuff. It actually does lend itself really
well to data pipelines. Data pipelines, unlike maybe some of the software engineering stuff,
it's a little bit different in that data changing is what causes often most of the headaches.
It's less so the actual code you write, but more the expectations tend to change so frequently
and so often in new and novel interesting ways
that you would often never expect.
And so the more you can sort of make that function so pure
that you can provide any sort of data set
and really test really easily these expectations
when they get the easier it is to sort of debug these things
and build them in the future.
Yeah, and cache them as well.
Yes, it's always nice.
Yeah.
So speaking of that kind of stuff,
What's the scalability story?
If I've got some big, huge, complicated data pipeline,
can I parallelize them and have them run multiple pieces,
like if there's different branches or something like that?
Yeah, exactly.
That's one of the key benefits, I think,
in writing your assets in this DAG way, right?
Anything that is parallelizable will be parallelized.
Now, sometimes you might want to put limits on that.
Sometimes too much parallelization is bad.
Your poor little database can't handle it.
And you can say, you know, maybe a concurrency limit on this one just for today is worth putting on.
Or if you're hitting an API for an external vendor, they might not appreciate 10,000 requests a second on that one.
So maybe you would slow it down.
Or rate limiting, right?
You can run into too many requests and then your stuff crashes.
Then you got to start.
It can be a whole thing.
There's memory concerns.
But let's pretend the world is simple.
Anything that can be paralyzed will be through Dagster.
And that's really the benefit of writing these DAGs
is that there's a nice algorithm for determining
what that actually looks like.
Yeah.
I guess if you have a diamond shape or any sort of split, right,
those two things now become, because it's acyclical,
they can't turn around and then eventually depend on each other again.
Exactly.
So that's a perfect chance to just go fork it out.
And that's kind of where partitions are also kind of interesting.
If you have a partitioned asset, you could take your data set, partition it to five buckets
and run all five partitions at once, knowing full well that because you've written this
in a idempotent and partition way, that the first pipeline will only operate on apples
and the second one only operates on bananas.
And there is no commingling of apples and bananas anywhere in the pipeline.
Oh, that's interesting.
I hadn't really thought about using the partitions for parallelism.
of course yeah it's a fun it's a fun little way to to break things apart so if we run
if we run this on the daxler cloud or even on our own this is pretty much automatic we don't have to
do anything like daxler just looks at it and says this looks parallelizable and it'll go or
that's right yeah um as long as you're you've got the full deployment whether it's oss or cloud
Dexter will basically paralyze it for you as much as possible.
You can set global concurrency limits.
So you might say, you know, 64 is more than enough, you know,
paralyzation that I need, or maybe I want less because I'm worried about
overloading systems, but it's really up to you.
I'm putting this on a $10 server.
Please don't, please don't kill it.
Just, just respect that it's, it's somewhat wimpy, but that's okay.
It'll get the job done.
All right.
I want to talk about some of the tools and some of the tools that are maybe at play here when working with Dagster and some of the trends and stuff.
But before that, maybe it may be speak to where you could see people adopt a tool like Dagster, but they generally don't.
They don't realize like, oh, actually, there's a whole framework for this.
right like i could sure i could go and build just on http server and hook into the request and start
writing to it but like maybe i should use flask or fast api like there's these frameworks that
that we really naturally adopt for certain situations like apis and others background jobs
data pipelines where i think there's probably a good chunk of people who could benefit from stuff
like this but they just don't think they need a framework for it like cron is enough yeah um
it's it's funny because sometimes cron is enough and i i don't want to encourage people not to use
cron um but think twice at least is what i would say so probably the first like trigger for me
of thinking of you know is that actually a good choice is like am i trying to ingest data from
somewhere uh because that's something that fails like i think we just can accept that you know if
you're moving data around the data source will break the expectations will change you will need
to debug it you'll need to run it and doing that in chron is a nightmare so i would say definitely
start to think about an orchestration system if you're ingesting data if you have a simple chronic
job that sends one email like you're probably fine i don't think to implement all of dags or just to
to do that. But the more closer you get to data pipelining, I think the better your life will be
if you're not trying to debug a obtuse process that no one really understands six months from now.
Excellent. All right. Maybe we could touch on some of the tools that are interesting. You see
people using you talked about duck db and dbt um a lot of d's starting here but give us a sense of
like some of the supporting tools you see a lot of folks using that are interesting yeah for
sure um i think in the data space probably dbt is one of the most popular choices and dbt
In many ways, it's nothing more than a command line tool that runs a bunch of SQL in a DAG as well.
So there's actually a nice fit with DAGster and DBT together.
DBT is really used by people who are trying to model that business process using SQL against typically a data warehouse.
So if you have your data in, for example, a Postgres, a Snowflake, Databricks,
Microsoft SQL, these types of data warehouses,
generally you're trying to model some type of business process.
And typically people use SQL to do that.
Now you can do this without dbt,
but dbt has provided a nice clean interface to doing so.
It makes it very easy to connect these models together,
to run them, to have a development workflow that works really well.
And then you can push it to prod and have things run again in production.
So that's dbt.
We find it works really well.
And a lot of our customers are actually using dbt as well.
There's DuckDB, which is a great,
it's like the SQLite for columnar databases, right?
It's in process.
It's fast.
It's written by the Dutch.
There's nothing you can't like about it.
It's free.
We love that.
It feels very comfortable in Python itself.
It does.
It's so easy.
Yeah, exactly.
The Dutch have given us so much, and they've asked nothing of us.
So I'm always very thankful for them.
It's fast.
It's so fast.
It's like if you've ever used Pandas for processing large volumes of data, you've occasionally hit memory limits or inefficiencies in doing these large aggregates.
I won't go into all the reasons of why that is, but DuckDB sort of changes that because it's a fast serverless sort of C++ written tooling to do really fast vectorized work.
And by that, I mean, like it works on columns.
So typically in like SQLite, you're doing transactions.
You're doing single row updates, writes, inserts.
And SQLite is great at that.
Where typical transactional databases fail or aren't as powerful is when you're doing aggregates, when you're looking at an entire column, right?
Just the way they're architected.
If you want to know the average, the median, the sum of some large number of columns, and you want to group that by a whole bunch of things, you want to know the first date someone did something and the last one.
Those types of vectorized operations, DuckDB is really, really fast at doing.
And it's a great alternative to, for example, pandas, which can often hit many limits and be a little bit slow in that regard.
Yeah, it looks like it has some pretty cool aspects, transactions, of course.
But it also says direct Parquet, CSV, and JSON querying.
So if you've got a CSV file hanging around and you want to ask questions about it or JSON or some of the data science stuff through Parquet, turn an indexed proper query engine against it.
Don't just use a dictionary or something, right?
Yeah, it's great for reading a CSV, zip files, tar files, Parquet, partitioned Parquet files, all that stuff that usually was really annoying to do and operate on.
you can now install DuckDB.
It's got a great CLI too.
So before you go out and like program your entire pipeline,
you just run DuckDB and you can start writing SQL
against CSV files and all this stuff
to really understand your data
and just really see how quick it is.
I used it on a bird dataset that I had as an example project
and there was millions of rows
and I was joining them together
and doing massive group buys
and it was done in like seconds.
And it's just hard for me to believe
that it was even correct
because it was so quick.
So it's wonderful.
I must have done that wrong somehow
because it's done.
It shouldn't be done.
Yeah.
And the fact it's in process
means there's not a babysit,
a server for you to babysit patch,
make sure it's still running.
It's accessible,
but not too accessible.
All that, right?
It's a pip and sell away,
which is always,
we love that, right?
Yeah, absolutely.
You mentioned, or I guess I mentioned Parquet,
but also Apache Arrow seems like it's making its way
into a lot of different tools
and sort of foundational sort of high performance
in memory processing.
Have you used this, Eddie?
I've used it, especially through working
through different languages.
So moving data between Python and R is where I last used this.
And Arrow's great at that.
I believe Arrow is like underneath some of the Rust to Python as well.
It's working there.
So typically I don't use Arrow like directly myself, but it's in many of the tooling I use.
It's a great product.
And like so much of the ecosystem is now built on Arrow.
Yeah, I think a lot of it is.
I feel like the first time I heard about it was through Polars.
That's right.
Yeah.
I'm pretty sure, which is another Rust story for kind of like pandas, but a little bit more fluent, lazy API.
Yes.
We live in such great times, to be honest.
So Polars is a Python bindings for Rust, I believe, is kind of how I think about it.
It does all the transformation in Rust, but you've had this Python interface to it.
And it makes things, again, incredibly fast.
I would say similar in speed to DuckDB.
They both are quite comparable sometimes.
Yeah, it also claims to have vectorized and columnar processing
and all that kind of stuff.
Yeah, it's pretty incredible.
So not a drop-in replacement for Pandas,
but if you have the opportunity to use it
and you don't need to use the full breadth of what Pandas offers,
because Pandas is quite a huge package.
There's a lot it does.
But if you're just doing simple transforms,
I think Polaris is a great option to explore.
Yeah, I talked to Richie Vink, who was part of that.
And I think they explicitly chose to not try to make it a drop-in replacement for Pandas,
but tried to choose an API that would allow the engine to be smarter and go like,
I see you're asking for this, but the step before you wanted this other thing.
So let me do that transformation all in one shot.
A little bit like a query optimization engine.
Yeah.
yeah what else what else is out there a couple we got time for just a couple more if there's
anything that you're like oh yeah people use this all the time obviously the databases you've said
postgres uh snowflake etc um yeah there's so much so another little one i like it's called dlt
dlt hub um it's getting a lot of uh attraction as well and what i like about it is how lightweight
I'm such a big fan of lightweight tooling that's not massive frameworks.
Loading data is, I think, still kind of yucky in many ways.
It's not fun.
And DLT makes it a little bit simpler and easier to do so.
So that's what I would recommend people just to look into if you got to either ingest data from some API, some website, some CSV file.
It's a great way to do that.
It claims it's the Python library for data teams loading data into unexpected places.
Very interesting.
Yes, that's great.
Yeah, this looks cool.
All right.
Well, I guess maybe let's talk about business, and then we can talk about what's next, and then we'll probably be out of time.
I'm always fascinated.
I think there's starting to be a bit of a blueprint for this,
but companies that take a thing,
they make it and they give it away.
And then they have a company around it.
And congratulations to you all for doing that.
Right.
And a lot of it seems to kind of center around the open core model,
which I don't know if that's exactly how you would characterize yourself,
but maybe you should talk about the business side.
Because I know there's many successful open source projects that don't necessarily result in full-time jobs or companies if people were to want that.
Yeah, it's a really interesting place.
And I don't think it's one that anyone has truly figured out well and can say this is the way forward for everyone.
But it is something we're trying.
And I think for Dexter, I think it's working pretty well.
What I think is really powerful about Dexter is the open source product is really, really good.
And it hasn't really been limited in many ways in order to drive cloud product consumption.
We really believe that there's actual value in that separation of these things.
There are some things that we just can't do in the open source platform.
For example, there's pipelines on cloud that involve ingesting data through our own systems in order to do reporting,
which just doesn't make sense to do on the open source system.
It makes the product way too complex.
But for the most part, I think Dagster open source,
like we really believe that like just getting it in the hands of developers
is the best way to prove the value of it.
And if we can build a business on top of that,
I think we're all super happy to do so.
It's nice that we get to sort of drive both sides of it.
To me, that's like one of the more exciting parts, right?
A lot of the development that we do in Dagster open source
is driven by people who are paid through what happens on Dexter Cloud.
And I think from what I can tell,
there's no better way to build open source product
than to have people who are adequately paid to develop that product.
Otherwise, it can be a labor of love,
but one that doesn't last for very long.
Yeah, whenever I think about building software,
there's 80% of it that's super exciting and fun,
10% and then there's that little sliver of really fine polish
that if it's not just your job to make that thing polished,
you're just, for the most part,
just not going to polish that bit, right?
It's tough.
UI, design, support.
There's all these things that go into making software
really extraordinary.
That's really, really tough to do.
And I think I really like the open source business model.
I think for me, being able to just try something,
not having talked to sales
and being able to just deploy locally and test it out
and see if this works.
And if I choose to do so, deploy it in production.
Or if I bought the cloud product
and I don't like the direction director's going,
I can even go into open source as well.
That's pretty compelling to me.
Yeah, for sure it is.
And I think the more moving pieces of infrastructure,
more uptime you want and all those types of things,
the more somebody who's maybe a programmer
but not a devops infrastructure person but needs to have it there right like that's an opportunity
as well right for you to say look you can write the code we made it cool for you to write the code
but you don't have to like you know get notified when the server's down or whatever like we'll just
take care of that for you that's pretty awesome yeah and it's efficiencies of scale as well right
like we've learned the same mistakes over and over again so you don't have to which is nice
i don't know many people who want to maintain servers but um people do and they're more than
welcome to if that's if that's how they choose to do so yeah for sure all right just about out of
time let's let's close up our conversation with where are things going for dagster like what's on
the roadmap what are you excited about oh that's a good one um i think we've actually published our
roadmap online somewhere. If you search Dijkstra roadmap, it's probably out there. I think for the
most part, that hasn't changed much going into 2024, though we may update it. There it is.
We're really just doubling down on what we've built already. I think there's a lot of work we
can do on the product itself to make it easier to use, easier to understand. My team specifically is
really focused around the education piece. And so we launched Dijkstra University's first module,
which helps you really understand the core concepts around Dagster.
Our next module is coming up in a couple of months,
and that'll be around using Dagster with DBT,
which is our most popular integration.
We're building up more integrations as well.
So I built a little integration called Embedded ELT
that makes it easy to ingest data.
But I want to actually build an integration with DLT as well, DLT Hub.
So we'll be doing that.
And there's more coming down the pipe,
but I don't know how much I can say.
Look forward to an event in April where we'll have a launch event on all that's coming.
Nice. Is that an online thing people can attend or something like that?
Yeah, there'll be some announcement there on the Dagster website on that.
Maybe I will call it one thing that's actually really fun.
It's called Dagster Open Platform.
It's a GitHub repo that we launched a couple months ago, I want to say.
And we took our internal, I should go back one more.
Sorry.
It's like GitHub, Dexter, the platform at GitHub.
I have it somewhere.
Yeah.
It's up here under the organization.
Yes.
It should be somewhere in here.
There it is.
Dexter open platform on GitHub.
And it's really a clone of our production pipelines.
For the most part, there's some things we've chosen to ignore because they're sensitive.
But as much as possible, we've defaulted to making it public and open.
And the whole reason behind this was because, you know, as data engineers, it's often hard to see how other data engineers write code.
We get to see how software engineers write code quite often.
But most people don't want to share their data platforms for various good reasons.
also either there's like smaller teams or maybe just one person and then like those pipelines are
so integrated into your specific infrastructure right so it's not like well here's a web framework
to share right like here's how we integrate into that one weird api that we have that no one else
has so there's no point in publishing it to you right that's typically how it goes or they're so
large that they're afraid that there's like some you know important information that they just don't
don't want to take the risk on yep so we built like something that's in the middle where we've
taken as much as we can and we publicized it and you can't run this on your own like it's not that's
not the point the point is to look at the code and see you know how does daxter use daxter and what
does that kind of look like nice okay all right well i'll put a link to that in the show notes and
people can check it out appreciate it yeah i guess let's wrap it up with the final call to action
people are interested in daxter how do they get started what do you tell them oh yeah daxter.io
the greatest place to start. You can try the cloud product. We have free self-serve or you can try
the local install as well. If you get stuck, a great place to join is our Slack channel,
which is up on our website. There's even an Ask AI channel where you can just talk to a Slack bot
that's been trained on all our GitHub issues and discussions. And it's surprisingly good
walking you through any debugging, any issues or even advice.
That's pretty excellent, actually.
Yeah.
It's real fun.
It's really fun.
And if that doesn't work,
we're also there in the community
where you can just chat to us as well.
Cool.
All right.
Well, Pedram,
thank you for being on the show.
Thanks for all the work on Dagster
and sharing it with us.
Thank you, Michael.
You bet.
See you later.